Promotion is considered one of the most integral parts of an employee’s career. Employees put in their years-long effort into the company’s work; to ensure a better position in the company. I will be using the hr-analysis dataset (source: HR Employee Promotion Dataset) to analyze what factors help predict the probability of an employee getting promotion. Firstly, we will check if education has a particular role in the promotion process [1]. The education of an employee is one of the fundamental factors for job recruitment/promotion. However, the highest level of education is not the only facet considered [1]. Secondly, we are all aware of gender discrimination in the workplace. Gender inequality in organizations is a complex phenomenon that can be seen in HR practices (i.e., policies, decision-making, and their enactment) that affects the hiring, training, pay, and promotion of women [2]. We will check the impact of gender on job promotion. According to [3], in most companies, senior employees are more likely to be promoted than junior employees. Employees are often advanced to higher-paying jobs not because of their superior skill, ability, or performance, as the human capital model may imply, but because of their greater length of service. We will analyze the dataset and check if the length of service has an impact on job promotion. As opposed to this, [4] talks about how seniority is losing importance in making promotion decisions. Few countries like America use this model that serves as a good source of inspiration in introducing a more performance-oriented system. However, when compared to western countries, seniority is likely to remain of importance. We will investigate which decision-making model of promotion has been utilized in our dataset. According to [6], an employee’s key performance indicator(KPI) impacts his/her chances of promotion. KPI is a matrix that is calculated based on the employee’s performance. We will analyze the dataset to check if KPI has any impact on the employee’s promotion chances. We will be covering these few analyses on our dataset to get some knowledge of influencing factors for a job promotion. The reason behind performing this analysis is, Job promotion has a high positive impact on job satisfaction and employee performance [5]. It’s evident that if an employee’s performance is increasing, it will help the company grow. So creating a model which predicts who should get promoted can help HR in choosing the right person. In Addition, if employees can also check their chances of getting promoted; Employees with a high probability of getting promoted will make sure to perform consistently well. However, employees with low probability would try to improve and reach the threshold. All in all, a good predictive model will ensure fair promotion. Fair promotion will lead to job satisfaction, increased employee performance, and the company’s growth.
 
We will work on a few hypotheses during the course of this research which are: 1) Does education have any impact on the chances of job promotion of an employee 2) Does gender play any role in job promotion 3) Is the length of service an important factor behind job promotion 4) Does the KPI of an employee impact his/her chance to get promoted

We started with a small step of data preprocessing. We removed the employee_id variable from the data frame, as it was irrelevant for the model building. In the next step, we split the dataset into two parts: a training set and a test set. 70% of the data was stored in the training set, while the remaining 30% was stored in the test set. We chose the logistic regression model for creating a predictive model for the dataset. The model was built using the backward elimination approach; The base model was created by passing everything in the glm() function and, the results of the model were analyzed using the summary function. We found a few insignificant variables in the model (gender and recruitment channel). These variables were removed while creating the second model. However, when we used anova test to compare both the models, we got a p-value of 0.7146 for the second model, which is enough to prove that the base model was a better fit. So we went ahead by choosing the base model as the final model. We used the predict function to predict the probability for the test data. We also set the decision boundary as 0.5. So probability > 0.5 will be set to 1 else 0. We also created a confusion matrix, which will display a matrix of correct and incorrect (True positives, False positives, True negatives, and False negatives) predictions performed by the model. At last, we calculated the accuracy of the model.

In the result section, we have provided the results of the method section. To start with, from the summary of the model, we can depict that department, education, no_of_trainings, age, previous_year_rating, length of service, KPIs_met>80, avg_training_score, and awards_won are the significant variables impacting the promotion of an employee. That answers our initial hypothesis that education and length of service impact the promotion of an employee. However, gender seems to be insignificant in terms of predicting the promotion of an employee. The coefficients of KPIs_met> 80, awards_won, and department suggest that they are the most influencing factors for promotion. After that, the anova test result helped us in choosing the correct model. The confusion matrix table shows us the number of correct & incorrect predictions (True Positives = 340, True Negatives = 13245, False Positives = 83, False Negatives = 930). We have also included the result of the accuracy of the model calculated in the method section. In the end, we have included a ROC curve. A ROC curve (receiver operating characteristic curve) is a graph showing the performance of a classification model at all classification thresholds [7]. We have got an AUC of 0.874. AUC ranges in value from 0 to 1. A model whose predictions are 100% wrong has an AUC of 0.0; one whose predictions are 100% correct has an AUC of 1.0 [7]. The value of AUC states that we have created a good model.

In this study, we performed analysis on a real-world dataset. The dataset was based on HR employee promotion data. It had a total of 14 attributes and 54808 instances. We were supposed to find out the attributes which influenced the promotion of an employee. We also made some hypotheses based on past researches and tried to examine those in our dataset. We started by exploring the dataset and managed to find some discrepancies in the data which we solved later. We also provided a table with a high-level data description, for the user to get an idea of the dataset. After this, we went on to the modeling part. We followed the conventional approach of splitting the dataset into training and test set. We implemented the logistic regression algorithm. The model was trained using the training data. We used the backward elimination approach and removed insignificant variables in the updated model. However, the ANOVA test suggested that the base model was more efficient. Summary data of the model helped in concluding the hypothesis. Education, KPI, and length of service turned out to be significant for getting a promotion. However, there was no proof of gender bias in the promotion chances. An employee should consider working efficiently so that they get a better KPI, and the employee should avoid frequent job-hopping as the length of service is an important factor behind an employee’s promotion. The most influencing factor for promotion turned out to be KPIs_met>80. The employee who meets the threshold of 80% had 185% higher chances of getting a promotion. Similarly, employees who won the award had 150% higher chances of getting a promotion. Once the model was ready, we started predicting the value of is_promoted for the test data. The probability with value > 0.5 were set to 1 else 0. The confusion matrix helped us in comparing the predicted values with the actual values; This way we can have an idea of how many correct/incorrect predictions were made by the model. We then visualized the ROC curve(receiver operating characteristic curve) which helped us in showing the performance of a classification model at all classification thresholds. We got an AUC of 0.874. The value of AUC suggested that we have created a good model. The KPIs_met>80% attributes coefficient helped us in developing an idea for the performance-based promotion hypothesis. Hence, to summarize we can say that the stakeholders/decision-makers should consider KPI, education, awards-won, and length of service of an employee before deciding to promote an employee. For further studies on how promotion can help improve the performance of an employee, we will need data for the analysis.
